# My Econ and Data Analysis Blog

## This page is currently under development because I have no experience with web development

### I will be posting short articles on things I find interesting about data analysis and my thoughts on current events

#### Until I figure out how to make this a proper functioning webpage, they will all be posted here

---

#### De-Dollarization, Trendy or Trendsetting?

7/8/2025 9:37PM

After a long hiatus, I am back and would like to delve into a topic which has been of interest to me for the past couple years, that being the status of the US dollar as the global reserve currency. For decades the dollar has prevailed as the de facto currency of choice due to the perceived stability and credit worthiness, bolstered by high economic growth and large volumes of international trade. But a shadow has been looming over the crown of the dollar, one that appears to have been growing more perceptible, especially given the trade war initiated by the current administration. Today I will go over several factors which I believe affect the US dollar and its prospects as a safe haven and whether the recent media coverage is in fashion, or whether there is more to the story.

To begin, let's set a little backdrop for our journey to today. I won't go into excruciating detail, but I think it's important to have the context in mind. You can skip the next two passages if you want to jump to the current day.

It's November 2021, inflation is still [considered to be transitory](https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20211103a.htm). Trimmed mean inflation (which excludes the upper 31% and lower 24% of price changes) has [slowly crept up to 4.3%](https://www.dallasfed.org/research/pce/2021/pce2111) in comparison to the 7.6% headline increase. Rate hikes are still not on the table as the Federal Reserve does not want to anchor inflation expectations in the minds of consumers. However, the near-0 rate environment is nearing an end at this point. Moving forward a few months to March 2022, the FED raises its policy rate and the cycle of tightening begins. For Q1 2022, interest payments made by the Federal government [amount to $637B](https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/A091RC1Q027SBEA), and the average interest rate for the fiscal year is [2.07%](https://fiscaldata.treasury.gov/interest-expense-avg-interest-rates/).

Flash forward a couple years to the summer of 2024 and we see the peak of the rate hike cycle, with the target rate reaching a [range of 5.25-5.5%](https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/reference-rates/effr). Around this time the national debt hits $35T for the first time and some members of Congress, such as David Schweikert, are [sounding alarm bells](https://schweikert.house.gov/2024-house-floor-speeches/). This is shortly before gross interest payments on the national debt surpassed $1T over a 12-month period in September. Interest payments have now exceeded spending on major categories such as national defense and Medicare, due in large part to the higher cost of refinancing. Only a couple months later, on the back of promises to renegotiate terms of trade to bring back manufacturing, and reduce the federal deficit, Donald Trump is elected for his second term in the White House.

Flash forward to present day and we are finding that the policy decisions made by the current administration will further add to the deficit, including the recent passage of the Big Beautiful Bill (2025 Infrastructure Act). The threat of tariffs in the first quarter of 2025 brutally shook markets and the dollar has weakened significantly against other G10 currencies such as the Euro and Swiss franc. The cost of financing public debt has taken center stage among other factors driving people away from the dollar. Net interest now accounts for [more than half of all discretionary spending in 2025](https://www.cbo.gov/system/files/2024-02/59710-Outlook-2024.pdf), adding to concerns about the feasibility of paying back the debt even with significant softening of the dollar and added federal revenue to be collected from tariffs. This brings us to two of the most obvious drivers of the current de-dollarization narrative, namely the erratic and arguably combative foreign policy and the ever increasing liabilities owed by the US government. But what other factors may be lurking just out of view?

In May of this year, Moody's became the final of the 3 major credit ratings agencies to [downgrade long-term issuer rating](https://ratings.moodys.com/ratings-news/443154). Although this event had little impact and was mostly symbolic, it solidifies the weakening credit worthiness of the US, which was previously sustained by high returns on assets with low financing costs. As tariffs put a drag on the domestic output of the US, the prospects of repayment do not seem quite as sure, even if it is only a marginal increase in default probability. Another less obvious factor which may be negatively impacting the credit worthiness of the US is the erosion of central bank independence. Although Jerome Powell and the rest of the FOMC have gone to great lengths to demonstrate their independence, the consistent rhetoric from the President suggests that he may appoint a new chair which can be more easily influenced at the end of Powell's 4-year term. While the chairman of the FED must still convince other governors to agree on monetary policy decisions, any threats to independence could lead to a loss of confidence by markets. Ironically, Trump's attempts to coerce Powell into lowering rates may end up increasing longer term yields anyway if markets decide that monetary policy decisions will be influenced by the executive branch.

Another, rather unexpected, drag on the dollar has been sitting in plain sight for some time. Aside from financing costs and debt service, the dollar is partially propped up by a large amount of demand in global trade. To establish some context, in the third quarter of 2024, the US dollar [accounted for 57.8%](https://data.imf.org/en/news/4225global%20fx%20reserves%20decreased%20by%203%20percent%20in%202024q4?_hsenc=p2ANqtz-_LsiOsFlkCqefwOWQMaPzh5ca_z7RkvwiwlpeabV7WolVrC0Fz__JQnfWs3S044aPYH65wFxmYiY5-QmlOK9uMa4UgZw) of the share of holdings in allocated foreign currency reserves. While not all of this is earmarked for trade settlement, a significant driver of these foreign currency reserves are necessary for countries looking to buy energy products such as oil. This is due to the petrodollar arrangement, which was established in the 1970s when Saudi Arabia agreed to price their oil exclusively in US dollars. The move towards electrification and renewable energy sources will eliminate a lot of this indirect demand for dollars. Even before oil loses its luster in global trade, degradation of the petrodollar may already be underway, with [Saudi Arabia alluding to openness](https://www.semafor.com/article/09/09/2024/to-woo-china-saudi-arabia-may-accept-yuan-for-oil) in pricing in yuan rather than exclusively dollars. Whether it be coincidence or not, the elimination of the electric vehicle tax credit in the US may extend use of fossil fuels for a bit longer, and thus the life of the petrodollar, but the sun is soon setting on the geopolitical leverage and increased demand garnered by pricing energy in dollars.

Surely, the world will not forget the dollar tomorrow, perhaps not even in the next 5 or 10 years, however the cracks in the dominance of the dollar are showing and they are here to stay in my opinion. The question to ask now is rather not "what currency will replace the dollar', but "what model will replace the unipolar dominance of the dollar?". Given the strong reactions to the US foreign policy across the globe in a short few months, I question if another single fiat currency will act as the reserve of the future. Whether a multi-polar system emerges, where it's likely that the dollar, euro, yuan, yen, and franc likely share the stage or whether digital assets finally take more precedence on the financial stage is to be seen with time. As an example, ethereum has been building large amounts of financial infrustructure and benefits from a vibrant financial ecosystem, which is strengthened by the decentralized nature of the platform. One thing is for certain though, the dollar has faltered, and the world has taken notice. It is only a matter of time now before the special treatment which it sees will fade, albeit with a significant offramp due to the large amounts of dollar denominated debt already floating around in the global economy.

---

#### Are Further Regional Bank Troubles Ahead?

5/10/2023 7:20PM

Financial news as of late has spared no coverage of the issues plaguing US regional banks. Although the precise cause of each failure may not be the same between the banks facing distress, a common theme regarding rate decisions has emerged. First Republic, which tailored its services to high net worth individuals, did not face the same circumstances of failure as did Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank. The commonality between these 3 failures, the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th largest bank failures in US history, are excessive paper losses on fixed income portfolios.

It is no secret that the recent open market operations by the Fed have had negative effects on the balance sheets of any fixed income holders. In the case of SVB, which held a significant percentage of its total assets in long dated treasuries at the time of collapse, total failure could have been avoided had they held their bonds to maturity. As with most banks, SVB utilized rate arbitrage between the rate paid out to depositors and the rate received from investments. Because of the near-zero rate environment which held for several years, SVB maintained thin margins on its deposits. Under normal circumstances, expected withdrawals would not exceed the liquid assets of the bank, preventing premature sales in their portfolio. However, the elevated rate environment impacted SVB in more than just the immediately obvious effect on their bond valuations. First and foremost, the increases in rates drastically depressed the prices of the Treasuries in SVB's portfolio, as would be expected. This may not have been a serious issue in itself, as the bonds were not held for sale and might not have had negative material impacts on any financial reporting. Unfortunately for SVB, they faced an increase in depositor demand which led to more withdrawals than expected. Although such an outcome is difficult to forsee in the moment, a retrospective analysis of the SVB's clients and business model might have suggested that SVB was more exposed to interest rates than accounted for. SVB's client base was primarily focused on tech companies, many of which funded most of their operations with very low cost financing. As rates, and the operating costs continued to rise, depositors at SVB found themselves needing to withdraw money rather than enter into new, less favorable, financing agreements to maintain operations.

Although the circumstances that caused SVB to fail can be attributed in part to the unexpected volume of withdrawals, the forced sale of bonds meant to be held to maturity is a significant aspect which is not unique to SVB. It is unwise to assume that the US banking system is as sound as the Federal Reserve's statements would imply, especially when we are facing 3 of the 4 largest bank failures by balance sheet in US history. While other banks may not necessarily be forced to close losing positions for liquidity reasons, the pervasiveness of paper losses in the banking system must be acknowledged. Considering the FRB's stated goal of quelling inflation, and the hawkish behavior as of late, there is a likely scenario wherein rates remain elevated for most of 2023. Whether or not further increases in the policy rate are due will be determined as economic data continues to be released. As of today, CPI numbers released by the BLS support the trend of disinflation and may influence the Fed to pause rate hikes, even if only temporarily. Assuming no unforseen supply shocks in the near future, like OPEC+ announcing further productions cuts, the recent troubles in the regional banking sector warrant a pause and potentially an accelaration of the schedule regarding rate cuts. If the FRB decides to continue increasing rates, not only will they find credit conditions to be more than sufficiently restrictive, it is likely they will expose more, albeit smaller, distressed banks. If the FRB finds itself able to balance the task of monitoring inflation and reducing the impact on the US financial system, Powell will surely find himself in the history books.

Best,

Michael Nicola

---

#### RIP FED Pivot

12/22/22 8:47AM

On the 22nd of December, at the time of writing but not publishing, the BEA released the estimated annualized real GDP growth figures for Q3 2022. The BEA estimated Q3 growth at 3.2 percent, putting an end the the technical recession we were faced with over the past two quarters of negative growth. More importantly, this estimate comes with the strengthening of some of the statements Jerome Powell was making at the most recent FOMC meeting. Powell, who felt that policy rates were not sufficiently restrictive, and announced an increase in the terminal rate, has been proven remarkably prescient with the recent growth we may have experienced. Hopes were high for many, including myself, that the Fed may decide to begin cutting rates halfway through 2023 at the earliest, though new information indicates this is not very likely. At the most recent FOMC meeting, the ostensibly dissonant decisions to slow the pace of rate increases while increasing the terminal rate may soon see more justification. My interpretation is that the Fed would like to see the effects of the rapid increases in the base rate, while not constricting the economy too much. To achieve this, they have dictated that lower increases for longer periods, and potentially a sustained level of higher rates, would be more effective than the sharp increase in rates that some might have expected. When the estimate for Q4 comes out perhaps we will have a better picture of the future of interest rates, but for now I believe that the data is supporting the Fed in their belief that policy is not tight enough.

Best,

Michael Nicola

---

#### Short IPOs and Long Indexes

12/03/2022 6:18PM

While reading the classic investment book "A Random Walk Down Wall Street", author Burton Malkiel makes a comment on new stock issuances that I believe is especially pertitent to our current stock market conditions. Malkiel asserts that new IPOs, even those in which participants are issued the initial shares rather than buying in a secondary market, often underperform the market as a whole. With the recent collapse of nearly all the new issuances from the past 2 years, I find myself wondering if it is possible to profit off of this tendancy.

IPOs are a method of bringing a previously private enterprise to the public markets. Most companies which go this route enlist the assistance of an investment bank to underwrite their shares. The process of underwriting is one in which the investment bank attempts to create a fair or client-beneficial valuation and find investors to sell the new shares to. At times, investment banks will stipulate that unsold shares will be purchased by the underwriter itself, but the primary source of income for an investment bank in this situation is through underwriting fees. When a new issuance greatly increases in value in the secondary markets, this can be a signal that the issuer has left a lot of money on the table as the issuance could have been sold at a higher price and vice versa. Insiders in this transaction, including employees and the underwriting firm, are often given share lockups to protect secondary investors. These lockup periods are typically 90 to 180 days and are contractually stipulated. If insiders choose to sell when their lockup period ends, this at times can signal a lack of confidence in the business or valuation.

Although there are several reasons for an insider to sell shares after a lockup period, it usually foretells a decline in price. Assuming that IPOs underperform the broader market, an investor may be able to seek gains from this underperformance. Rather than going short before the lockup period ends, which may result in losses if the company continues to appreciate in value, I hypothesize that shorting and IPO and reinvesting those funds into a broad index can reduce some of the systematic risk faced by short sellers. The basic gist is that one can reduce the short losses from appreciation of the overall market, while also netting the spread in performance between the IPO and an index. Please note I have not tested this strategy at all and I am not advising anyone to enact such a strategy, just that it might be in the toolbox of an investor. Hopefully when I have some more time on my hands I can see if historical data would support such an investment methodology.

Best,

Michael Nicola

---

#### Using Statistical Methods For Asset Pricing

11/06/2022 5:22PM

Can asset prices be somewhat accurately estimated using statiscal methodologies a la Renaissance Technologies? The idea that mathematics and large amounts of computing power can be used to profitably participate in markets is not a new idea, but it is also not a generally accepted consensus. Computer-driven trading has been the attributed cause to several market events, usually crashes involving automated trading systems continuously selling based on signals produced by other automated systems. Financial intuition would say accurately pricing equities or other assets with many qualitative factors is unlikely or outright impossible for purely quantitative measures to capture. However, as machines become more capable with larger amounts of increasingly more qualitative data, the prospect of algorithmic trading systems seems more probable than ever.

Months ago, in early 2022, I used Keras and Tensorflow to predict digital asset prices with data I collected from Kraken's API. My reasoning for starting this project was out of curiosity regarding the validity of technical analysis, especially for assets that have scarce fundamentals. The results were not astounding, but the predicitions were far more accurate than I had anticipated. Perhaps using other nonlinear approximators on large finanical datasets could yield similar if not better results. I decided that I was not giving my model a fair chance, as it was trying to predict an exact price in the t+1 interval using associations learned from t data. The immediate improvement I came up with was to transform the problem from regression to classification, and defining return bins based off the volatility of the asset in question, but this would still restrict the model to a single asset.

In the near future, I am seeking to improve the current model that has been applied to digital assets. When I feel that significant progress has been made, I will attempt to translate these principles towards pricing commodity derivatives and potentially equities. Over the lifespan of this endeavour, I will try to maintain timely updates on progress and code samples so my work can be assessed and scrutinized. For those who may stumble across my journey to create my own pricing model, I hope something can be learned from my failures and hopefully that more can be learned from any successes. I cannot determine a timeline at this moment, but I am looking to prioritize this project over my other projects in my free time, which is already relatively scarce. I will still be posting current event articles when I have a chance, and I hope to come with updates soon.

Best,

Michael Nicola

---

#### Mississippi Record Lows And The Fed Pivot

10/18/2022 1:42PM

Drought has hit more than the Yangtze and Rhine rivers it seems as the Mississippi River has recorded all-time low water levels near Memphis. While droughts certainly affect crop yields, another crucial aspect is the effect on shipping. The reduction in water levels could result in a lowered capacity for barges which travel along the Mississippi, adding further restrictions to supply. Furthermore, reductions in the ability to ship goods like soybeans and corn could have additional negative effects on the ability for farmers to upkeep livestock. With inflation already at decade highs, greater restrictions in the supply of food could add to the persistently high CPI numbers. As the Fed looks to contract demand, it seems they are fighting a continually uphill battle and it is my opinion that easing will not occur unless credit spreads become too overbearing on businesses. Barring a severe credit event or high rates of delinquencies and defaults, it seems we will almost certainly be facing another 150 basis points this year and potentially smaller hikes to come next year.

In markets and in the media, it seems everyone is seeking the bottom. On a marginally worse than expected CPI release, there was a short-lived but intense rally in the major indices. Although the sentiment appears to be shifting towards finding any reason to be bullish, I believe reasons to be positive in the near term are few and far between. If low water levels put pressure on farmers and shipping via the Mississippi, we may be seeing high food prices accompany gas prices which will only push the Fed to restrict demand more severely. More troubling is the idea that farmers may begin to cut output in expectation of lower deliverable capacity. Perhaps the market has already baked in a looming recession, although it seems to me much of the bullish action is unfounded and speculative. The Bank of England's recent purchasing of gilts has lulled market participants into a sense of security and generated optimism regarding a potential pivot from the Fed. This is an outcome I find unlikely in the near future given the commitment made by the Fed and the necessity to maintain credibility in achieving inflation targets. We are in a very different place than we were during the pandemic, and it seems that markets are certainly not the primary concern of the Fed in making policy decisions. If the Fed remains tight to finish the year and early into the next I believe we could begin to see easing occur in the second half of 2023, but further supply related issues may throw a wrench in this timeline even assuming a higher targetted rate of inflation for the next few years. Either way, I am not one to call a bottom, but I find it hard to justify that it may come sooner rather than later.

Best,

Michael Nicola

---

#### Indications For Persistent Oil Demand

10/05/2022 6:10PM

Today OPEC+ announced production cuts of 2 million barrels per day (bpd). According to Reuters, since some OPEC nations were already below production targets, this amounts to an estimated real cut of 1 million bpd. The White House released a statement of "disappointment" regarding these cuts as the West attempts to weaken the leverage and economic benefits to Russia from higher oil prices. This output cut follows the minor cut made in September of 100,000 bpd, a minor reduction in the grand scheme of things, but equivalent to the production increase announced by OPEC not 2 months earlier following President Biden's visit to Saudi Arabia. The reason for Biden's visit? To lower energy prices and by extension consumer gas prices. In an attempt to keep prices low following today's announcement from OPEC+, the Department of Energy is scheduled to release another 10 million barrels from the Stratgeic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) onto the market next month. Throughout 2022 nearly 180 million barrels have been released from the SPR in order to lower costs at the pump. As of December 31, 2021 there were about 593,682,000 barrels in reserve, by September 30, 2022 this amounted to only 416,389,000. The historic release of oil from the SPR has undeniably lowered gas costs for consumers, but at what cost to the government? Releases were made under the assumption that the SPR could be refilled at a lower price in the following years, when geopolitical conditions are likely to be less tense. OPEC, in fact, based their production cuts on the premise of a looming recession and consequential reduction in demand for oil. However, I believe there are several factors that may lead to persistent demand for oil which may cause refilling US reserves to be more costly than anticipated.

On the surface level, the sheer amount of oil released from the SPR is not trivial relative to daily production amounts, which averaged 77 million bpd in 2021. This may lead to higher anticipated demand from non-production related activity in the following years as the SPR is refilled. Although there are many signs pointing towards an near-term global economic decline, the proactive cuts from OPEC and the sanctions on Russian energy significantly reduce the available supply of oil as inputs, let alone to refill US reserves. Further cuts from OPEC may arise as the dollar and other global currencies gain strength from higher interest rates. On the demand side, India's rapidly expanding economy may mean we are on the precipice of the next commodity super cycle. Life expectancy and GDP have been more rapidly increasing in India since the turn of the 21st century, while poverty rates have declined. On top of this, India passed the UK in early September to become the 5th largest global economy. Higher rates of expansion could lead to a comparable increase in demand for commodities which was recently seen with the extreme growth in China. Further increases in the rate of growth in India may induce upward pricing pressure on global commodity markets for a significant amount of time. Coupled with the reduction in supply due to an anticipated economic downturn and a gaping hole in the SPR, it seems higher energy prices may be here to stay, although perhaps not a current price levels. I eagerly await a plan from the White House to restore reserves and can only be hopeful that it does not cost the taxpayer more than it was worth in the end.

Best,

Michael Nicola

---

#### JOLTS Data And Rebounding Markets

10/04/2022 1:09PM

The past two days of trading have epitomised the volatile market conditions of the past couple years. As of writing, the S&P 500 is up 2.52% today following gains yesterday. Some would say that lower than expected Job Openings and Labor Turnover (JOLTS) numbers have given the Fed reason to become more dovish, as labor demand is appearing to taper. Others may look toward the Bank of England's recent purchase of gilts as indication that the Federal Reserve may be in a similar position with regards to market instability caused by high benchmark yields. Earlier in the year, similar bullish gains off dovish sentiment were made from mid-June to mid-August before being snuffed out by hawkish Fed guidance. Although reduction in labor demand may signal that some wage inflation pressures are being reduced, I believe it is important to evaluate the previous track record of the Fed and their clear priority to stimulate disinflation. When CPI and PCE numbers release on the 13th and 28th respectively, this may serve as a better indicator of what the Fed will do at the November and December FOMC meetings. As of now, I don't expect the JOLTS data to provide enough information to reverse the Fed's hawkish course of action. For the last two years, speculation has seemingly become rife and valuations detatched from their fundamentals. The explosion of special entities like SPACs and the increase in leveraged derivatives trading amongst retail traders has painted a picture of Wall Street akin to Las Vegas. Have the past two years conditioned investors to be uncharacteristically bullish in the face of news, or could we truly be nearing the bottom of the market?

Best,

Michael Nicola

---

#### Fed Credibility And Tightening Conditions

9/27/2022 3:39PM

The credibility of a country's central bank is essential to the conductance of monetary policy. Faith that the actions of the central bank will result in the intended consequences makes the job of managing interest rates and inflation much easier. This is partially supported by the idea that inflation expectations can often affect the resulting inflationary conditions. Expectations of higher inflation may lead to workers asking for wage increases, resulting in price increases to meet the new demand for wages. On the other side, businesses expecting increases in the price of inputs may also increase the price of their products to protect their margins. The reputability of a central bank when it comes to managing inflation can influence the expectations for inflation for market participants and become a self-fulfilling prophecy. For example, faith that a central bank will achieve target inflation levels can reduce the possibility of capital outflows resulting from higher than target inflation expectations and thus leading to further currency devaluations. The market can often be used as a guage for opinions on central bank activites. Higher long-term yields can indicate that the central bank is not in control of inflation, while low yields can reduce the cost to long-term borrowers and imply that monetary conditions are too tight. I believe the Federal Reserve is currently facing a predicament to maintain credibility and that significant doubts are being imposed upon them.

It is no longer news that the benchmark yield curve has inverted. Why does this matter and what exactly is a yield curve inversion? The benchmark yield curve is essentially a graph of the yields for default risk-free government bonds against different maturities. The yield curve is usually upward sloping, indicating that a longer time to maturity while have a higher yield. This is the case because longer time horizons have more uncertainty regarding economic conditions, and investors are thus compensated for the higher risk with a greater return. In the situation of a yield curve inversion, longer maturity bonds have lower yields than shorter maturity bonds. While this can be indicative of several things, such as imminent rate decreases, it is often a reliable leading indicator of recession. In the case described earlier where the market may have a higher demand for long-term debt and push yields lower, this can be a result of market forces anticipating a severe economic contraction due to tighter monetary conditions. Market participants, by lowering the yields for long-term debt, are effectively lowering the cost of capital for businesses to incentivize investment and prevent contractions.

In 2022, we have seen the Fed repeatedly raise its target rate by amounts exceeding 50 basis points with more to come. I believe that these rate increases are an attempt to wrestle inflation under control in order to maintain the Fed's credibility in managing inflation. The Fed is already seemingly behind on the rate increases and facing scrutiny from the transitory claims of current inflation, which is now at the highest level in four decades. As inflation worsened, due to geopolitical turmoil among other factors, the pressure on the Fed only continued to mount. Talks of a "soft landing" have seemingly gone out the window as Fed Chairman Jerome Powell recently reaffirmed his hawkish stance since the speech at Jackson Hole. The questions that remain now are how far the Fed will go to tame inflation and how their actions will affect near term growth prospects. Although there is near universal consensus that growth with be restricted in the near term, it is my opinion that there will be no "soft landing" and the coming economic contraction will be not be trivial as the Fed will likely overshoot with the rate increases. Fed policy is already determined by information recieved on a lag, and the Fed demonstrated a clear lack of foresight when inflation fears first began, even going as far as massaging their data to meet target ranges in late 2021. I think that the aggresive rate hikes from the Fed are a result of what most would consider a late response to address inflation. Now, the Fed is in a position where further inflation would lower their credibility significantly and reduce their ability to affect future expectations. For these reasons, I believe the Fed will do whatever they deem necessary to combat inflation, including plunging the US into recession. I do not think that Powell wants a hard recession by any means, but regardless of the necessity for the Fed to prove it can control inflation, the lagged response of the Fed during this whole debacle is what scares me more. I am confident the Fed's number one priority is fighting inflation right now, and reducing economic impacts have secondary considerations. Based on the fact that monetary policy is usually decided by data, which leads to an unavoidable lag in response, and the higher priority of price stability I think it is inevitable for the Fed to overshoot the rate increases.

Best,

Michael Nicola

---

#### Why Is Inflation Such a Big Deal?

9/22/2022 9:12AM

Rising inflation over the past year has led to a lot of media coverage about it. YOY inflation has been the highest since the 1970's and the Fed is racing to quell it and prevent a hyperinflationary scenario. Why is it so important that we keep inflation under control, and what does it mean to keep inflation under control? First let's establish the problems with persistently high inflation. In a scenario where inflation expectations were perfectly accuracte (meaning wage growth and price growth grew predictably in tandem), decreases in real income would not be the issue. The costs of this persistently high inflation would be the cost to businesses when changing advertised prices frequently (menu costs) and the cost to individuals for having to frequently withdraw money from banks (shoe leather costs) since people tend to hold less cash in inflationary environments. Both of these negatives caused by high inflation are not as costly now as we further digitize our consumption. If high inflation can be costly, why have inflation at all? The Fed targets a low inflation rate (generally 2-3 percent) to prevent unintended deflation caused by monetary policy and to stimulate consumption. If the future value of one's cash will be less in real terms, it makes more sense to buy things now rather than later. This also serves as the justification for why deflation is viewed so negatively. In deflationary scenarios, the real value of one's money will increase over time. While this may not lead to a direct fall in consumption of normal goods and necessities, the purchase of durable goods (which often require loans) may be deferred in order to buy at a more favorable price. This leads to a deflationary spiral where producers lower prices to meet lowered demand, and the expectation of further price decreases strengthens. If the costs of higher inflation are becoming less relevant today, why is inflation seen as a huge negative right now? It is important to clarify that the inflation we are currently seeing is generally unanticipated, and its consequences are more far-reaching. Unanticipated increases in inflation can lead to unwarranted increases in output by producers, wealth transfers from lenders to borrowers, and increases in borrowing costs due to uncertain conditions. Futhermore, many would say we are experiencing a period of *stagflation*, wherein a decline in economic output is paired with rising inflation. Intuitively, stagflation is largely negative because real incomes tend to fall with both the increase in prices and decrease in production, causing people to have less money to spend on more increasingly more expensive goods.

If this period of unexpected inflation is so bad, how does it get corrected? Inflation is driven in part by expectations for inflation, although it also is largely affected by supply and demand mechanics. An old saying related to the cause of inflation is that "more money chasing fewer goods" is what drives inflation. Although this is not generally accepted in modern economics, it can be boiled down to the concepts of supply and demand. Simply put, decreases in supply with the same level of demand, or increases in demand with the same level of supply will tend to put upward pressure on prices. During the pandemic shutdown, monetary stimulus was utilized to prop up demand and keep our level of consumption high even as we struggled to maintain the same level of output. This is a potential reason for the massive increases in asset prices that we have seen from 2020 and 2021. The invasion of Ukraine, draconian shutdowns in China, and increase in demand from the reopening have been large factors in the inflation we experience today. Now, the Fed is reversing course and raising interest rates through quantitative tightening to quell demand. Raising rates will increase the cost of borrowing and therefore, reduce consumption. Unfortunately, it is my opinion that the Fed is fighting an uphill battle, as there are many factors driving inflation which are related to global supply shortages. Furthermore, the current administration is not making the job of the Federal Reserve any easier with their legistlation, even if they name it the Inflation Reduction Act. Specifically related to the IRA, corporate tax minimums and taxation on stock buybacks (which is traditionally beneficial for holders of equity) will only serve to increase the pressure on corporate margins and may lead to further price increases to maintain profitability levels. More concerning is the potential increase in consumer demand that comes with the significant amount of loan forgiveness. Without getting into a discussion about the fairness or reasoning behind the loan forgiveness, it is important to recognize the increase in disposable income which will be granted to many consumers. This increase in disposable income may have a similar effect on demand as the stimulus which was deployed during the pandemic was intended to have (increase demand). Will loan forgiveness make it even harder for the Fed to fight inflation? Only time will tell, but in my opinion quantitative tightening was already difficult enough and the challenges only seem to be piling up.

Best,

Michael Nicola

---

#### September 20-21 FOMC Meeting and Conference Thoughts

9/21/2022 3:00PM

Today marked another 75bp rate hike after the FOMC meeting. In the following press conference, Fed Chairman Jerome Powell discussed how rising rates have weakened the housing market and negatively affected fixed investment of businesses. Similar to the speech at Jackson Hole, Powell placed a heavy emphasis on the Fed taking a strong stance against inflation and to curb a potentially higher outlook on long term inflation. The FOMC members all reduced their GDP growth targets to below the long run median, and yet I can't help but feel as if their targets have not lowered enough. Increasing inflation, as I see it, has been spurned on by a large increase in demand (partially due to a reopening, and partially due to the stimulus over the past couple of years) and by major disruptions in supply due to global stress on supply chains. Athough there is an undeniable demand aspect to the inflation, I can't help but think that the supply issue is more pertinent to the rises in prices. Athough much of this is due to global disruptions, it is my opinion that large rate raises may further constirct supply (at least in the near term) as businesses struggle to maintain their levels of investment and struggle to acquire relevant inputs to their industry due to higher borrowing costs. Although it is certain that growth must slow down to combat inflation, will the Fed overshoot and plunge the economy into a deep recession? Worse yet, is it possible that 2023 sees more aggresive rate hikes which put the US at risk of experiencing a deflationary period? Only time will tell, but based on the lagged response of the Fed to acknowledge the non-transitory nature of current inflation, the necessity for the Fed to maintain credibility in their conducting of monetary policy, and the strongly hawkish position being broadcasted to the public it is not unforseeable that the Fed may behave too aggressively.

Best,

Michael Nicola
